Effects of early life exposure to traffic-related air
pollution on brain development in juvenile
Sprague-Dawley rats
Epidemiological studies link traffic-related air pollution (TRAP) to increased risk for various neurodevelopmental
disorders (NDDs); however, there are limited preclinical data demonstrating a causal relationship between TRAP and
adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes. Moreover, much of the preclinical literature reports effects of concentrated
ambient particles or diesel exhaust that do not recapitulate the complexity of real-world TRAP exposures. To assess the
developmental neurotoxicity of more realistic TRAP exposures, we exposed male and female rats during gestation and
early postnatal development to TRAP drawn directly from a traffic tunnel in Northern California and delivered to
animals in real-time. We compared NDD-relevant neuropathological outcomes at postnatal days 51–55 in TRAPexposed
animals versus control subjects exposed to filtered air. As indicated by immunohistochemical analyses, TRAP
significantly increased microglial infiltration in the CA1 hippocampus, but decreased astrogliosis in the dentate gyrus.
TRAP exposure had no persistent effect on pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in the male or female brain, but did
significantly elevate the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 in females. In male rats, TRAP significantly increased
hippocampal neurogenesis, while in females, TRAP increased granule cell layer width. TRAP had no effect on apoptosis
in either sex. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that TRAP-exposed females, but not males, also exhibited
decreased lateral ventricular volume, which was correlated with increased granule cell layer width in the hippocampus
in females. Collectively, these data indicate that exposure to real-world levels of TRAP during gestation and early
postnatal development modulate neurodevelopment, corroborating epidemiological evidence of an association
between TRAP exposure and increased risk of NDDs.
Introduction
Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are a heterogeneous
group of conditions characterized by altered
brain development1,2
. NDDs exact a significant toll on
individuals, families, and society3
. There is, therefore,
considerable interest in identifying risk factors with the
goal of modifying these to decrease the incidence and/or
severity of NDDs. There is now credible evidence that
environmental factors influence individual risk for
NDDs4,5
. Exposure to traffic-related air pollution (TRAP)
and/or proximity to roadways during development
represent environmental factors that have been associated
with increased NDD risk6–10. TRAP has also been linked
to NDD-relevant symptoms, such as cognitive impairment11,12,
psychomotor deficits13,14, and hyperactivity15.
While these associations have been reported for multiple
cohorts in differing locations and across varying exposure
levels, they have yet to be confirmed in an experimental
model that reproduces the heterogeneous and dynamic
nature of real-world TRAP to which humans are exposed.
The respirable fraction of near-roadway air pollution is
primarily composed of vehicular emissions, which are
complex mixtures of volatile organic compounds, nitrogen
oxides, carbon monoxide, and ultrafine particles
comprising metals, semi-volatile and nonvolatile organic
compounds, and black/elemental carbon16,17. Exposure to
selected TRAP components has been shown to cause
various NDD-relevant outcomes in rodent models.
Exposing mice to fine or ultrafine particulate matter (PM)
during development increases neuroinflammatory cytokines
and astrocyte activation18,19, alters microglia morphology20
and neurotransmitter levels18, and increases
oligodendrogenesis21 and lateral ventricle size18. Developmental
exposure of mice to diesel exhaust alters cortical
volume20, disrupts cortical organization22, and
impairs neurogenesis23,24.
Most animal studies published to date, however, have
employed exposure paradigms that do not capture the
complexity or spatiotemporal dynamics of real-world
TRAP exposures. Since composition, dose, and timing of
air pollution exposures may influence biological outcomes25–27,
translating the relevance of much of the
published animal literature to the human condition is
problematic. To better represent human TRAP exposures
in an animal model, we developed an exposure paradigm
that preserves the gaseous and particulate components of
real-world TRAP and captures daily fluctuations in pollutant
levels. To accomplish this, we exposed male and
female Sprague-Dawley rats from approximately gestational
day (GD) 14 through postnatal day (PND) 47–51 to
TRAP drawn directly from a freeway tunnel system28,29
and delivered unchanged to an exposure chamber in realtime.
Age- and sex-matched littermate controls housed in
the same facility were exposed to filtered air (FA). This
paper compares neuropathologic outcomes of relevance
to NDDs in TRAP vs. FA subjects. Companion papers
compare effects of TRAP exposure and transportation
stress on behavioral outcomes30 and describe the properties
of the tunnel air pollutants (Bein, unpublished data).
Methods
Detailed methods are provided in supplemental
materials.
Exposure Facility
We constructed a TRAP exposure facility adjacent to a
major freeway tunnel system in the Bay Area of Northern
California (Bein, unpublished data). Briefly, air drawn
from above the eastbound exit of tunnel bore 1, containing
both light and heavy-duty vehicle traffic, was
delivered to airtight exposure chambers housed inside the
facility vivarium. Supply air for separate but identical FA
exposure chambers housed in the same vivarium was
drawn from ambient air surrounding the facility and
subjected to a series of emissions control technologies
prior to being delivered to the animals. This facility was
inspected and approved by the UC Davis Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).
Animals
Animal procedures were conducted in strict compliance
with IACUC-approved protocols, with careful regard for
alleviation of pain and suffering. Animals were housed in
controlled environmental conditions (20–26 °C; 12:12
light-dark cycle) with food and water provided ad libitum.
Details of animal husbandry, pup development, and
behavioral testing are described in a companion paper30.
Briefly, pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were transported to
the exposure facility at GD 14 and randomly assigned to
either FA or TRAP groups. Neither birth outcomes nor
pup development were significantly different between FAand
TRAP-exposed animals. Shortly after birth, pups were
randomly assigned to a cohort that underwent behavioral
testing (n = 15 per group) or a cohort that did not (n = 6
per group, hereafter referred to as “untested”). Sample
sizes were determined based on power analysis of previous
data. Litter effects were carefully controlled in both
cohorts. Pups were weaned at PND 21, and separately
housed by sex for the remainder of the study. At
approximately PND 50, animals were transported back to
the UC Davis campus. After 18 h recovery, behaviorally
tested animals were imaged by MR, while untested animals
were euthanized as previously described31. Briefly,
whole blood was collected via cardiac puncture, animals
were transcardially perfused, and left and right brain
hemispheres were collected for cytokine analyses and
immunohistochemistry, respectively. Plasma was collected
from whole blood and stored at -80 °C.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MRI experiments were performed on PND 53–55
behaviorally tested rats at the UC Davis Center for
Molecular and Genomic Imaging (CMGI) using a Bruker
Biospec 70/30 (7T) small-animal scanner (Bruker BioSpin
MRI). Volumes of the whole brain and lateral ventricles
were compared between experimental groups.
Immunohistochemistry
Briefly, 10 µm thick brain sections were immunostained
using the following primary antibodies: ionized binding
adaptor molecule 1 (IBA1, catalog #19-19741, Wako;
1:1000), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, #3670 S, Cell
Signaling; 1:1000), s100ß (#ab52642, Abcam; 1:500),
neuronal nuclei (NeuN, #MAB377, Millipore; 1:500),
doublecortin (DCX, #MAB2253, Millipore; 1:500) and
Ki67 (#ab15580, Abcam; 1:750). Fluorescent images were
acquired at 20x on an ImageExpress MicroXL
High-Content Analysis System (Molecular Devices).
Fluorescence that is twice the background in negative
control samples was considered positive staining.
Patten et al. Translational Psychiatry (2020) 10:166 Page 2 of 12
Overlapping tiles were stitched together to create final
images for each hippocampal subregion (dentate gyrus,
CA1, CA3). Images were analyzed using ImageJ v1.52p
(https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/; NIH). Reactive astrogliosis and
immature neurons were quantified as the percent area
within each brain region immunopositive for GFAP or
DCX, respectively. Microglial cell infiltration and neurogenesis
were assessed as the percentage of total cells
identified by DAPI staining that were immunopositive for
IBA1- or Ki67/DCX, respectively. Granule cell layer width
was measured as previously described32. All image
acquisition and analyses were performed by an investigator
blinded to experimental group and sex.
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-X
nick end labeling (TUNEL)
Apoptosis was quantified by TUNEL staining per the
manufacturer’s instructions (kit #11684795910, Roche)
with the following modifications: (1) DNase (1000 U/ml,
Promega) diluted in DNase buffer supplied by the manufacturer
was applied directly to slides; (2) sections were
incubated in a solution of 30 nM DAPI (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) in PBS for 5 min prior to mounting in Prolong
Gold (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
Frozen hippocampal tissue was homogenized with a
hand-held homogenizer (UX-44468-25, Cole-Parmer) for
15 s and total RNA was isolated from the homogenate
using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. qPCR was performed as previously
described33. Primers obtained from Integrated
DNA Technologies were designed to span exon-exon
junctions using Primer-BLAST. Primer sequences and
efficiencies are shown in Supplemental Table 1.
Tissue cytokine and chemokine levels
Hippocampal cytokines were quantified using a BioPlex
ProTM 23-plex cytokine/chemokines assay (BioRad)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the
following modifications: ~300 mg of frozen hippocampal
tissue was homogenized in cell lysis buffer (BioRad)
supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma
Aldrich) diluted 1:25 in water. Samples run in duplicate at
1000 µg/ml were measured using a LuminexTM 100 suspension
array system (Bio-Plex 200, Bio-Rad). Analyte
concentrations were calculated using a standard curve
derived from reference cytokines, and the geometric
means were compared for each group.
Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad
Prism statistical software, version 7.03 (GraphPad Software,
La Jolla, CA). Our primary goal was to determine
the effect(s) of TRAP exposure on relevant neuropathological
outcomes. However, to account for the possible
influence of sex on these outcomes, we performed twoway
ANOVAs to determine if sex, or the interaction of
sex with exposure, affected outcomes. If there was a significant
main effect of sex, or an interaction between sex
and exposure, then post hoc analyses were performed on
males and females separately. Post hoc tests included twosided
Student’s t test, or Sidak’s test with correction for
multiple comparisons if there was an interaction between
sex and exposure. Pair-wise comparisons were performed
between groups with similar variance. If two-way
ANOVA determined that sex did not affect endpoints,
then male and female data were collapsed by exposure,
and collapsed data are represented graphically. Correlations
between neurogenic markers and lateral ventricle
size were analyzed by Spearman’s correlation coefficient.
Data are presented as mean ± SD, unless otherwise noted.
A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.
Results
Male and female Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to
TRAP or FA for 24 h/d from GD 14 to PND 47–51 (Fig. 1).
PM2.5 and total suspended particles (TSPs) were measured
and averaged across 8 days within the study period.
Mean PM2.5 levels in FA were 3.74 µg/m3 ± 1.21 compared
to 13.94 µg/m3 ± 12.86 in TRAP. Mean TSP levels
in FA were 4.18 µg/m3 ± 1.18 compared to 23.58 µg/m3 ±
21.48 in TRAP (Fig. 1b). More detailed descriptions of
TRAP and FA PM2.5 composition are provided in the
Supplemental Information. Briefly, elemental, organic,
and total carbon levels were significantly increased in
TRAP compared to FA (Supplemental Fig. 1), and trafficrelated
metals comprised a larger percentage of PM2.5 in
TRAP than in FA (Supplemental Fig. 2).
TRAP modulates the cellular neuroinflammatory response
in the hippocampus
To determine whether TRAP triggers neuroinflammation,
we first measured the percentage of cells immunopositive
for IBA1, a biomarker of microglia34, in the CA1,
CA3 and dentate gyrus (DG) subregions of the hippocampus
in PND 51–55 rats (Fig. 2). Sex did not significantly
affect the outcome in any hippocampal region
(CA1: F (1,19) = 1.717, p = 0.514; DG: F (1,19) = 0.006,
p = 0.938; CA3: F (1,20) = 0.3438, p = 0.564); therefore,
male and female data were collapsed within exposure
groups. Post hoc analysis showed that TRAP significantly
increased the percentage of IBA1+ cells in the CA1
region (Fig. 2a, b) (Student’s t test, p = 0.022), suggesting
TRAP induced microgliosis in this subregion. TRAP did
not alter the percentage of IBA1+ cells in the DG (Fig. 2b,
Student’s t test, p = 0.682) or the CA3 (Fig. 2b, Student’s
t test, p = 0.427).
Patten et al. Translational Psychiatry (2020) 10:166 Page 3 of 12
Astrocytes also contribute to neuroinflammatory
responses35, therefore, we next measured immunoreactivity
for the astrocyte-specific biomarkers, GFAP and
S100ß36. Analyses by 2-way ANOVA indicated that sex
did not have a significant effect (F (1,20) = 1.557, p =
0.227), so male and female data were collapsed within
exposure groups. We observed a significant (~22%)
decrease in the area of GFAP immunoreactivity in the DG
of TRAP subjects (Fig. 2c, d, Student’s t test, p = 0.0044).
In contrast, TRAP had no significant effect on S100ß
immunoreactivity in the same brain region (Fig. 2e, Student’s
t test, p = 0.058). Within the CA1 and CA3, TRAP
had no significant effect on GFAP (Fig. 2d, CA1 p = 0.690;
CA3 p = 0.394) or S100ß (Fig. 3e, CA1 p = 0.110; CA3
p = 0.492) immunoreactivity.
TRAP increases hippocampal IL-10 levels in females
Microglia and astrocytes influence neurodevelopment
via the release of soluble signaling molecules, such as
cytokines and chemokines, which may have pro- or antiinflammatory
effects, and growth factors34. Therefore, we
next measured selected cytokine, chemokine, and growth
factors in hippocampal tissue from PND 51–55 subjects
using a Bio-Plex ProTM assay that quantifies protein levels
of 23 analytes (Table 1). We observed sex-specific differences
in the expression of several cytokines; however,
only one factor, IL-10, was significantly altered by TRAP.
As identified by 2-way ANOVA, there was a significant
effect of sex on interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels (F (1,18) =
11.36, p = 0.003), with decreased IL-6 in males relative to
females. However, TRAP did not affect IL-6 in male or
females. A similar pattern was observed for growth factor
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF): 2-way
ANOVA showed a significant effect of sex (F (1,18) =
8.859, p = 0.008), with males having significantly lower
levels of G-CSF than females. However, TRAP exposure
did not modify G-CSF in either sex. For interleukin-10
(IL-10), we observed a significant interaction between sex
and exposure (F (1,18) = 5.963, p = 0.0252). Post hoc
analyses showed that TRAP females had significantly
higher levels of IL-10 than FA females (Sidak’s test; p =
0.014), but IL-10 levels in males were not affected by
TRAP (Sidak’s test; p = 0.417). Analysis by 2-way
ANOVA also identified a significant interaction between
sex and exposure for the chemokine C-C motif 2 (CCL2)
(F (1,18) = 4.568, p = 0.0466); however, Sidak’s test post
hoc analyses did not reveal significant effects between
groups. The remaining cytokines included in the assay
(Table 1) were not significantly altered by exposure or sex.
TRAP exposure increases hippocampal neurogenesis in
male rats and granule cell layer width in female rats
TRAP altered GFAP, but not S100ß, immunoreactivity,
and this effect was observed only in the DG, which
Fig. 1 Experimental design. a The exposure facility consisted of a vivarium, where animals were housed in FA or TRAP exposure chambers, and a
behavioral testing suite. TRAP drawn from a freeway tunnel system in Northern California was delivered unchanged to the exposure chamber. FA
exposures were created by sequentially filtering ambient air adjacent to the vivarium to remove volatile and semi-volatile components, NOx, and
ultrafine and fine particulate matter. b PM2.5 and total suspended particulates (TSP) in TRAP vs. FA shown as the mean ± SD (n = 8). c Pregnant dams
were transported to the facility at gestational day 14; pups were born in the facility and remained there until PND 47–51. Pups were divided into two
cohorts: one that was not used for behavioral studies (yellow bar) and another that was behaviorally tested and imaged by MR (green bar).
Patten et al. Translational Psychiatry (2020) 10:166 Page 4 of 12
contains a neurogenic region in the postnatal rat
brain37,38. GFAP is also a biomarker of neural progenitor
cells in the rodent hippocampus37,39, therefore, we next
considered the possibility that altered GFAP expression in
the DG might reflect TRAP effects on neurogenesis.
Although neurogenesis in the mammalian brain primarily
occurs prior to birth, a neurogenic zone persists in the
postnatal and adult subgranular zone (SGZ)38,40. Newborn
neurons arise from neural stem cells in the SGZ, and
then migrate into the granule cell layer (GCL) as they
mature. To quantify neurogenesis, we first measured
expression of the immature neuronal marker DCX in the
SGZ and the GCL (Fig. 3a, b). Sex had a significant main
effect on DCX expression (F (1,17) = 5.697, p = 0.0289),
therefore, the effects of TRAP were examined separately
in male and females. Post hoc analyses showed that TRAP
increased DCX expression in males (Sidak’s test; p =
0.012), but not females (p = 0.291). Co-immunostaining
with the cell proliferation biomarker Ki6741, indicated
that TRAP significantly increased the percentage of
Ki67+/DCX+ cells in the SGZ and GCL of males (Fig. 3a,
c; Sidak’s test, p = 0.021). TRAP had no significant effect
on the percentage of Ki67+/DCX+ in the SGZ and GCL of
females (Sidak’s test, p = 0.451).
In order to determine whether TRAP altered expression
of mature neuronal markers, we used the mature
neuronal cell biomarker, NeuN32, to quantify GCL width
at PND 51–55 (Fig. 3d). Analysis by 2-way ANOVA
Fig. 2 TRAP alters microglial infiltration and astrocyte reactivity at PND 51–55. a Representative photomicrographs of IBA1 immunoreactivity
(red) in the CA1 hippocampus of FA vs. TRAP females. Sections were counterstained with DAPI (blue) to identify cell nuclei. Bar = 100 µm.
Arrowheads indicate IBA1+ cells. b Quantification of microglial infiltration in hippocampal subregions, indicated as percentage of IBA1+ cells.
c Representative images of GFAP (red) and s100ß (green) immunoreactivity in the dentate gyrus of FA vs. TRAP females. Bar = 100 µm. Astrogliosis
was quantified as the percentage area immunopositive for GFAP (d) or s100ß (e). Data from male and female animals are combined and presented
as the mean ± SD (n = 10–12 animals/exposure). Circles represent an individual animal (average of four brain slices per animal); white = FA;
gray = TRAP. * = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01 (Student’s t test).
Patten et al. Translational Psychiatry (2020) 10:166 Page 5 of 12
indicated a significant interaction between exposure and
sex on GCL width (F (1,16) = 11.38, p = 0.0039). Post
hoc analysis indicated that TRAP significantly increased
GCL width in females (Sidak’s test; p = 0.009), suggesting
that more mature neurons were present in the GCL
of TRAP vs. FA females. There were no significant
Fig. 3 TRAP alters neurogenesis in a sex-dependent manner. a Representative images of the dentate gyrus from PND 51–55 males
immunostained for DCX (red) to label immature neurons; Ki67 (green), proliferating cells; NeuN (cyan), mature neurons. Bar = 100 µm. Arrowheads
identify cells double-labeled for Ki67/DCX; insets are of the field outlined in the white box. b Quantification of immature neurons measured as
percent area of the SGZ and GCL immunopositive for DCX. c Quantification of cycling immature neurons measured as the percentage of total cells in
the SGZ that were Ki67+/DCX+. d GCL width measured as band of NeuN immunoreactivity. e Representative images of TUNEL staining (green) to
identify apoptotic cells; sections were counterstained for DAPI (blue) to label cell nuclei. DNase I was used as a positive control. f Quantification of
TUNEL staining. g Fold-change in expression of Sox2, Igf2, and Igf1 in the hippocampus at PND 51–55 rats, normalized to the geometric mean of
Gapdh and Ppia. Data presented as mean ± SD (n = 5–6 animals/group). For immunohistochemistry, four sections were analyzed per animal; for
qPCR, two replicates/animal. Each circle represents the mean for one animal; white = FA; gray = TRAP. *p < 0.05 (Sidak’s test for
immunohistochemical data; Mann–Whitney test for qPCR data).
Patten et al. Translational Psychiatry (2020) 10:166 Page 6 of 12
differences in GCL width between TRAP and FA males
(Sidak’s test; p = 0.290).
To determine whether sex-specific effects of TRAP on
apoptosis contributed to the sex-specific differences in
TRAP effects on immature vs. mature neuronal markers,
we performed TUNEL staining. Very few apoptotic cells
were detected by TUNEL in the male or female DG (Fig.
3e, f). This likely reflects the developmental stage of the
brain at the time of analysis, and not a technical issue with
the TUNEL stain, since numerous apoptotic cells were
detected in brain sections treated with DNase I as a
positive control42. Analysis by 2-way ANOVA did not
indicate any significant main effects of sex or exposure, or
an interaction between these factors on apoptosis.
Neurogenesis is regulated by transcription and growth
factors, including Sox2, Igf2, and Igf143–45. Sox2 is a master
transcription factor that regulates neurogenesis in the
DG in utero and during postnatal development43. Sox2
transcript levels were increased in some TRAP males
relative to FA males, but this effect was highly variable,
and not statistically significant (Fig. 3g; Sidak’s test, p =
0.204). Sox2 transcript levels were not altered by TRAP
in females (Sidak’s test, p = 0.983). In contrast, transcript
levels of Igf1, a growth factor implicated in autism
spectrum disorder44 and known to enhance neurogenesis45,
were significantly increased by TRAP in males
(Fig. 3g; Mann–Whitney test, p = 0.039) and increased,
but not significantly, in females (Fig. 3g; Mann–Whitney
test, p = 0.052). This effect was specific to Igf1, as Igf2
transcript levels were not affected by TRAP in females or
males (Fig. 3g; Sidak’s test, p = 0.8826 and p = 0.9932,
respectively).
Table 1 Protein levels of cytokine, chemokine, and growth factors in the hippocampus at PND 51–55.
Female (pg/ml ± s.d.) Male (pg/ml ± s.d.)
Patten et al. Translational Psychiatry (2020) 10:166 Page 7 of 12
Lateral ventricle size is decreased in TRAP females
Altered lateral ventricle size has been observed in the
brains of patients with autism, with studies reporting both
decreases46 and increases47,48. In a mouse model, developmental
exposure to ultrafine particulate matter
increased lateral ventricle size18. To determine whether
TRAP altered lateral ventricle size in our model, a cohort
of subjects that previously underwent behavioral testing
(Figs. 1c and 4) were imaged by MR. Analysis by 2-way
ANOVA indicated that sex had a significant main effect
on lateral ventricle size (F (1,54) = 11.22, p = 0.002) and
brain volume (F (1,56) = 51.96, p < 0.0001). Post hoc
Fig. 4 TRAP decreases lateral ventricle volume and increases GCL width in females. a Representative MR images of female brains at postnatal
day 53-55. Arrows indicate location of lateral ventricles. b Lateral ventricular volumes and (c) whole brain volumes in TRAP vs. FA females and males.
d Representative images of the GCL and SGZ from TRAP vs. FA females. Bar = 100 µm. e Quantification of immature neurons measured as percent
area within the SGZ and CGL immunopositive for DCX. f Quantification of cycling immature neurons quantified as percentage of Ki67+/DCX+ cells.
g Mature neuron numbers estimated as the GCL width based on NeuN immunoreactivity. h Correlation between lateral ventricular volume and GCL
width in female rats (Spearman correlation coefficient; r = -0.6041, p = 0.0428; n = 11 animals). White = FA; gray = TRAP. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01
(Student’s t test).
Patten et al. Translational Psychiatry (2020) 10:166 Page 8 of 12
analyses indicated that TRAP significantly decreased lateral
ventricular volume in females (Fig. 4a, b; Student’s t
test, p = 0.003). The decrease was not due to effects of
TRAP exposure on whole-brain volume, which was not
significantly different between TRAP and FA females (Fig.
4c; Student’s t test; p = 0.741). In contrast, TRAP had no
significant effect on lateral ventricular volume or whole
brain volume in males (Fig. 4b, c; Student’s t test,
p = 0.807 and p = 0.708, respectively).
Decreased lateral ventricle size is correlated with increased
GCL width in TRAP females
Since behavioral testing can alter neurogenesis49, we
tested whether the TRAP-specific changes in neurogenesis
we observed in subjects that did not undergo behavior
testing were also observed in the MR-imaged cohort that
were tested for behavior. In the cohort of animals imaged
by MR, TRAP exposure significantly increased the area of
DCX immunoreactivity in males (Student’s t test, p =
0.0113), but not females (Student’s t test, p = 0.4428),
indicating TRAP increased neurogenesis in males (Fig. 4d,
e). However, in this cohort, TRAP did not increase the
percentage of DCX+ cells that were also immunopositive
for Ki67 in males or females (Fig. 4f; Student’s t test, p =
0.463, p = 0.612, respectively). GCL width was significantly
increased in TRAP females vs. FA females
(Fig. 4g; Student’s t test, p = 0.0236). GCL width was
increased, but not significantly, in TRAP males (Student’s
t test, p = 0.052).
Since decreased lateral ventricle size has been hypothesized
to result from early increases in brain growth46,
we determined whether lateral ventricle size was significantly
correlated with neurogenic markers in our
subjects. In females, we observed a negative relationship
between lateral ventricle size and GCL width (Spearman
correlation coefficient; r = -0.6014, p = 0.0428) (Fig. 4h),
suggesting that the neurogenesis trends we observed by
histopathology in female rats were correlated with MRI
lateral ventricle volume.
Discussion
Epidemiologic studies have linked TRAP and nearroadway
exposures to increased risk of NDDs10,11,14, and
multiple preclinical studies have linked developmental
exposure to high levels of selected components of TRAP
to NDD-relevant phenotypes in mice18,20,21,50. Here, we
extend these studies to demonstrate that real-world TRAP
exposures that preserve the gaseous and particulate
components of TRAP, and capture the daily fluctuations
in levels of these components, alter neurogenesis and
growth in the developing rat brain. Specifically, we
observed that TRAP: (i) increases DCX expression, a
proxy measure for neurogenesis51,52, in the SGZ and GCL
of males; (ii) increases the percentage of cycling neural
progenitor cells (Ki67+/DCX+) in the SGZ of males; (iii)
increases GCL width, which reflects numbers of mature
neurons32, in females; (iv) decreases lateral ventricular
volume in females; and (v) increases Igf1 transcripts,
which can promote brain growth45,53,54, in both males and
females. These observations, which to our knowledge are
the first preclinical evidence that TRAP increases neurogenesis
in male rats, and increases granule cell layer width
in female rats, suggest a biologically plausible mechanism
by which TRAP may increase NDD risk.
Many NDDs have a strong sex bias, although the
affected sex differs by disorder55. Epidemiologic studies
have largely focused on TRAP in the context of autism
spectrum disorders (ASDs) and attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), which are more commonly
diagnosed in males55. Clinical studies have shown that
increased brain volume in early life is characteristic of a
subset of children diagnosed with ASD56,57, and MRI
studies have shown decreased lateral ventricle size in
young boys with ASD46, presumably as a result of brain
overgrowth. In this regard, our finding of increased neurogenesis
in the male brain is consistent with the human
literature. While the observation of increased granule cell
layer width and decreased lateral ventricle size in the
female brain does not fit the sex bias profiles of ASD and
ADHD, altered patterns of cellular proliferation and
neuronal differentiation are common to the pathogenesis
of many NDDs and intellectual disabilities that affect both
males and females1,58. Moreover, many genetic risk factors
for NDDs have functional roles in pathways that
control neurogenesis58–60, such as FMR156 and PTEN41.
Thus, TRAP may be an environmental risk factor for
NDDs in addition to ASD and ADHD.
Our observation of decreased lateral ventricle size in
female but not male rats differs from several previously
published studies of mice that reported increased ventricle
size in both males18 and females21 in response to
TRAP. These discrepant findings may reflect differences
in TRAP exposure levels, windows of exposure, and species
between our study and these previous studies.
Alternatively, it may be that we observed sex differences
in this outcome because males initially exhibit slower
postnatal brain growth compared to females57. Thus the
sex-specific effect of TRAP on brain growth phenotypes
we observed at a single time point in development (PND
51–55) may reflect sex differences in intrinsic brain
growth trajectories. Perhaps if we had examined later
developmental times, we would have observed decreased
lateral ventricles in males as well. Indeed, our MRI data
indicated such a trend in TRAP males.
In contrast to our findings, two recent studies reported
that TRAP decreases neurogenesis in rodent models.
However, there are significant differences in the exposure
paradigms between our study and these previous reports.
Patten et al. Translational Psychiatry (2020) 10:166 Page 9 of 12
In one study23, 8-week old mice were acutely exposed to
diesel exhaust particles at 250–300 µg/m3 for 6 h, while in
the second study24, rats were exposed to nanoparticles at
340 µg/m3 for 5 h/day from GD 2 to PND 175. By contrast,
our peak PM2.5 levels varied between 18.84 and
37.68 µg/m3
, and were delivered chronically from GD 15
to PND 50. Our window of exposure approximated midgestation
to early adolescence in humans57,61, and our
exposure paradigm mirrored traffic flow patterns, creating
an “intermittent” exposure pattern, rather than a constant
insult. Given the intermittent exposure and modest concentrations,
it is perhaps not surprising that we observed
TRAP to have an effect on neurogenesis that was opposite
to that reported in previous studies. Cycles of injury and
repair in the brain, particularly in the developing brain,
have been shown to contribute to changes in circuit
connectivity62,63, and a key determinant of circuit connectivity
is neurogenesis64,65. It is important to note,
however, that our study is consistent with one of these
previous reports in that decreased neurogenesis in TRAPexposed
animals was specific to males23. Our finding that
TRAP alters brain growth is consistent with several other
studies of intermittent air pollution exposures. For
example, male mice exposed to diesel exhaust particles
during gestation showed increased cortical volume prior
to birth, although this switched to decreased volume at
PND 3020. Other studies have noted increased oligodendrogenesis
and myelin production21,66,67 in male and
female mice exposed to ultrafine particulate matter during
gestation. Collectively, these studies underscore the
importance of timing, duration, and type of exposure in
dictating neurodevelopmental phenotypes.
In comparing our neuroinflammatory findings with
human data, there are again similarities and differences.
We observed increased IBA1+ cell density in both male
and female TRAP-exposed animals, which is consistent
with findings in postmortem ASD brains68. However,
human studies report increased levels of proinflammatory
cytokines in children diagnosed with
ASD69–71, while the only TRAP-specific change we
observed in cytokine levels was increased IL-10 in TRAP
females. In the brain, IL-10 is predominantly expressed by
microglia, consistent with our observation of increased
microglial density in the hippocampus of TRAP animals.
Since IL-10 is considered an anti-inflammatory cytokine
that suppresses excessive inflammation72, it is possible
that the IL-10 increase we observed in TRAP brains at
PND 51–55 was a compensatory response to earlier
inflammatory insults. Indeed, our findings echo those of
other models that used intermittent exposure to ultrafine
particulate matter, which reported decreased IL-1ß and
IL-6 in the brains of mice18.
The unexpected decrease in GFAP immunoreactivity
that we observed in the DG of TRAP animals may reflect
early perturbations in neurodevelopment. Specifically,
during neurogenesis, there is an established neurogenesisto-astrogenesis
switch, in which the initial production of
neurons transitions to the generation of astrocytes needed
to support these neurons36. Although the mechanisms
controlling this switch have not been fully elucidated, IL-6
signaling, neural activity, and the BMP family of growth
factors are implicated73. It is hypothesized that interference
with this process during development may result
in delayed astrogenesis that contributes to the pathogenesis
of NDDs36.
Living in close proximity to roadways increases exposure
to not only TRAP, but also noise and vibration,
which are both associated with maternal stress, adverse
neurodevelopmental outcomes8
, and poor cognition74.
Since TRAP and FA animals were similarly exposed to
noise and vibration in the exposure facility, it seems likely
that differential outcomes between these groups were
predominantly due to TRAP. However, we cannot rule
out potential interactions between TRAP and noise/
vibration. Another limitation of our study is that we only
examined neuropathology at one time point. Thus, we
cannot determine whether gestational or postnatal exposures
were more important in driving TRAP-associated
neurogenesis phenotypes. In humans and in rodents, the
majority of neurons within the brain are generated prenatally36,38.
After birth, neurogenesis declines rapidly, and
in the adult brain, it is largely absent except in the SGZ
and SVZ, where neurogenesis occurs throughout life,
albeit at declining levels38,75. Since the majority of granule
cells in the rat DG are generated in the first three postnatal
weeks76,77, it seems plausible that postnatal exposures
to TRAP are critical. However, we cannot rule out
the possibility that exposure during gestation was ultimately
responsible for the neurogenesis phenotypes we
observed.
In conclusion, our data are among the first to link TRAP
to increased neurogenesis in male rats, and increased
granule cell layer width in female rats. Given other
laboratory and clinical data identifying altered patterns of
neurogenesis and brain growth as a pathogenic mechanism
of NDDs60,78, our data support a model in which
TRAP exposure during critical developmental windows
can bias brain growth towards NDD phenotypes.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Donald Bruun for help collecting tissues, and Jonas Calsbeek
and Brad Hobson for assistance with in vivo imaging experiments. This work
was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH; grants R21 ES025570,
R21 ES026515, and P30 ES023513). KTP was supported by NIH-funded
predoctoral training programs awarded to the University of California, Davis
(UC Davis; T32 MH112507 and T32 ES007059). This project used core facilities
supported by the UC Davis MIND Institute Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities Research Center (IDDRC; U54 HD079125) and the IDDRC at
Washington University in Saint Louis (U54 HD087011).